This manuscript presents SMODERP2D project and related recently
triggered development. SMODERP2D computational tools have been
successfully integrated into Esri ArcGIS, GRASS GIS and QGIS desktop
GIS platforms. On the top of that, the concept of so-called GIS providers
has been introducted. Ongoing development is mainly focused on
computational routines and parallel computation experiments. Also OGC
Web Processing Service providing SMODERP2D functionality is planned to
be established. All the tools are currently distributed as
experimental ready for testing and user feedback. The~official stable
release of SMODERP2D model is planned for 2020. This includes also
user documentation which is currently under development.

In the case of SMODERP2D model, the run-time is an issue, especially
if multiple mid-scale hydrological basins in fine spatial resolution
grid computation needs to be undertaken. The code parallelization is a
common practice in cases where the reduction of run-time is convenient
or even necessary, therefore the existence of the TensorFlow-based
branch; and although this branch is still under development, the
reduction of the computation costs is already reaching up to 40
per cent depending on the data and architecture. This experiment also
shows that the parallelized branch should not be used as the default
one, but an ad hoc solution should be chosen depending on the data and
available computing power. Even though the SMODERP2D model does not
belong in the family of forecasting models (where the short run-time
is necessary) the run-time speed up will increase the usability of the
model in practice and research applications.

SMODERP2D source code is available on GitHub
\cite{smoderp2d-github-2019} under GNU GPL licence. 
